THE ARCHITECTURE OF VIRAL GENOMICS:
Foundations of Evolutionary Inference, Selection Metrics, and Computational Modeling

By Robert Friedman

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction: Scientific Belief and the Limits of Viral Origin Reconstruction
Chapter 1: Foundations of Viral Genomics and Biotechnology
Chapter 2: Quantitative Selection Metrics: dN/dS and pNC/pNR
Chapter 3: The Architecture of Viral Phylogenetics: Trees and Ancestral States
Chapter 4: Deep Learning and Sequence-to-Sequence Modeling in Evolution
Chapter 5: Ecological and Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Viral Populations
Conclusion: Epistemology and the Future of Viral Surveillance
Bibliography


INTRODUCTION: SCIENTIFIC BELIEF AND THE LIMITS OF VIRAL ORIGIN RECONSTRUCTION

The study of viral populations presents a unique challenge to the traditional paradigms of biological inquiry. Viruses, defined as numerous subcellular entities of genetic material encapsulated in a protective package, exist in a state of dependency upon their cellular hosts. While the precise particulars of the emergence of the earliest viral ancestors remain largely unknown, the evolutionary histories of their genes are tractable through the application of rigorous evolutionary methods, specifically gene sequence comparison and phylogenetic reconstruction [Friedman, 2026]. These investigations depend fundamentally on nucleotide or protein sequence data and a reference to the underlying processes of genetic replication, which are the proximate causes of taxon-specific differences in the rates of genetic mutation and the correction of replication errors.

A naive deterministic model of evolution, which expects viral types to be classified by mere observation and assumes static ecological phenomena, is not supported by the corpus of modern science. Instead, it is an ideal of the scientific method to infer knowledge of viral origins through models based on the stochastic processes of molecular evolution. These approaches provide the basis for validating and building knowledge on virus evolution, leading to confidence and robustness in scientific findings—a requisite to the formation of what we define as a scientific belief [Friedman, 2026].

A primary reason to pursue a philosophical grounding is for the construction of sound arguments and the rejection of sophistries that are frequently pursued in human society, such as the formation of belief by statements of mere opinion or the use of naive analogical reasoning without the substance of material evidence [Friedman, 2026]. These flaws are as likely to occur among those trained in the scientific method, whether by theory or as a practitioner, as they are among untrained others.

In the context of viral genomics, we must confront the inherent limits of historical reconstruction. As the rate of genetic replication in viruses is generally higher than that of cellular life, there is an expectation for a higher potential for adaptiveness in nature [Aiewsakun and Katzourakis, 2016]. Their cellular hosts, upon which viruses depend for replication, generally evolve at a lower rate, and therefore, any extant host population is presumed to have settled on a commensal or pathogenic relationship with them. This disparity creates a dynamic landscape where viral populations show evidence of subdivision, expansion into novel niches, and the formation of new variants through the mechanisms of mutation, recombination, natural selection, and genetic drift [Fisher, 1930].

Phylogenetic analysis, the prevailing method for studying these populations, is inherently probabilistic. It is a known principle that deeper and more ancient evolutionary relationships across a phylogenetic tree are not as tractable for reconstruction as those that are more recent. This is an expectation derived from the errors inherent in both the methods and sampling of empirical data and the methodology of evolutionary analysis itself. One method for estimating these kinds of errors is bootstrap analysis, a repeated recomposition of the genetic data which leads to measurements of confidence for the pattern of branching across a tree.

The compounding effect of errors over evolutionary time leads to a high rate of error and low reliability for the construction of ancestral character states [Friedman, 2026]. This problem of historical reconstruction is also observed in the natural languages of human societies; it is more difficult to reconstruct the divergent syntax and semantics between ancient forms of Latin and the Romance languages of Europe than it is to reconstruct the recent history within a single Romance language. In the latter case, large gaps of knowledge do not exist, and the possibility of false identification of shared traits is minimized.

Robust empirical analysis of virus populations relies on robust data sampling at the molecular level, stochastic modeling, and reliability in the methods of phylogenetic reconstruction. However, science-based belief in the biological sciences is generally less predictive than that offered by the precision of models employed in classical physics. Therefore, confidence across the natural sciences is dependent on a continual feedback process: observation of phenomena, hypothetical statements about their underlying causes, and experimentation for the validation of those hypotheses.

This volume serves as a comprehensive guide to the methodologies employed in the EvolCat-Python project, integrating classical population genetics with modern computational approaches. We will explore the foundations of viral genomics, the metrics used to detect natural selection, the architecture of phylogenetic trees, and the application of deep learning models to predict evolutionary trajectories. Throughout, we will maintain a focus on the epistemological limits of our knowledge, grounding our conclusions in the tenets of empiricism and a reasonable level of skepticism toward novel findings. As we navigate the complex landscape of viral evolution, we must remember that nature is not merely a reflection of our interpretations, but a set of processes that emerge independently of our mind [Friedman, 2026].

The sections following this introduction will delve into the technical particulars of our workflow, incorporating simple toy examples to illustrate the bioinformatic principles discussed. It is our hope that this assembly of knowledge provides a foundation for forming robust scientific beliefs regarding the origins and dynamics of viral populations.

The advancement of biotechnological innovation has been a primary driver in our capacity to probe these viral processes. From the early construction of cDNA libraries—converting unstable, single-stranded mRNA into stable, double-stranded DNA—to the modern era of synthetic genomes and deep mutational scanning, our technical repertoire has expanded the horizon of what is observable [Friedman, 2024]. The ability to "boot to life" a synthetic virus from a purely digital sequence, as achieved by Eckard Wimmer’s team with poliovirus, has fundamentally shifted our view of viruses from purely biological entities to "chemicals with a life cycle" [Wimmer, 2002].

In the sections that follow, we will detail how these foundational technologies integrate with computational frameworks. We will examine the use of Python for sequence analysis, the application of phylogenetic toolkits like UShER for tracking massive viral outbreaks, and the implementation of Transformer-based models to learn the internal biophysical rules of viral proteins. By grounding our computational models in empirical biological data, we strive to move beyond the "cloud of unknowing" that surrounds viral origins and toward a more definitive, data-driven understanding of the evolutionary forces that shape our world [Friedman, 2025].

This textbook is organized as a didactic progression, starting with the molecular foundations of viral genomics and concluding with the large-scale ecological dynamics that govern global pandemics. Each chapter builds upon the last, reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of modern virology—where biology, statistics, and computer science converge to reveal the hidden architecture of viral evolution.


The epistemological foundations of our inquiry are rooted in the distinction between mere opinion and knowledge derived from empirical evidence. As caution is offered in "The Demon-Haunted World", the scientific method serves as a candle in the dark, a system for explanations of natural processes based on their power to explain phenomena and build knowledge from experimental data samples [Sagan, 1996]. This approach is a rejection of the sophistries that persist in human discourse, where belief is often formed by statements without the substance of material evidence.

In the study of viruses, we encounter the problem of historical reconstruction in its most acute form. Since we cannot directly observe the ancient ancestors of contemporary viral lineages, we must instead rely on the quantifiable measures of evolutionary relationships provided by genetic samples. Phylogenetic analysis, the study of the evolutionary history and relationships among individuals or groups of organisms, serves as our primary lens. It is inherently a probabilistic endeavor, ideally based on the linear arrangement of nucleotides or amino acids that constitute the viral genome.

An alternative method for estimating these relationships is to analyze data of a virus’s physical characteristics, such as its morphological traits. However, such an approach is hampered by a lack of sufficient data samples and a lesser reliability as a classifier with taxonomic insight. The confounding factors of the convergence of traits over time among unrelated populations—where distinct lineages may independently evolve similar morphological features to adapt to similar ecological niches—makes morphological data a less permanent and quantifiable measure of evolutionary relationships than genetic sequences.

Therefore, our focus remains on the empirical analysis of viral genes. As we move forward into Chapter 1, we will examine the molecular structures and biotechnologies that allow us to transform these genetic samples into actionable scientific knowledge. We will explore how cDNA libraries, plasmid technology, and synthetic biology have moved beyond observing past evolution to actively demonstrating the dynamics and fitness consequences of genetic change.

This volume is intended to be a robust scientific report, grounded in the tenets of empiricism and a reasonable level of skepticism toward novel conclusions. Complex natural phenomena are typically not amenable to our instinct for simple order and hierarchy. Instead, they depend on a complexity of expression and a patience for experimentation and subsequent interpretation. This is the foundation of modern scientific rhetoric for the arrival at a belief about the causes of natural phenomena [Friedman, 2026].


CHAPTER 1: FOUNDATIONS OF VIRAL GENOMICS AND BIOTECHNOLOGY

Virus genomics is the field of virology dedicated to studying the complete genetic material of viruses, focusing on their structure, function, and evolution. At the molecular level, viral genomes are remarkably diverse, existing as either single-stranded or double-stranded DNA or RNA. Their sizes are typically small, ranging from a few kilobases to several megabases, which influences evolutionary constraints such as the emergence of overlapping genes to maximize information density in a compact genome [Friedman, 2022].

Viral genome types are classified into seven groups according to the Baltimore classification system:
Group I: Double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses (e.g., Adenoviruses, Herpesviruses).
Group II: Single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) viruses (e.g., Parvoviruses).
Group III: Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) viruses (e.g., Reoviruses).
Group IV: Positive-sense single-stranded RNA (+ssRNA) viruses (e.g., Coronaviruses, Picornaviruses).
Group V: Negative-sense single-stranded RNA (-ssRNA) viruses (e.g., Orthomyxoviruses, Rhabdoviruses).
Group VI: Positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses with a DNA intermediate (Retroviruses, e.g., HIV).
Group VII: Double-stranded DNA viruses with an RNA intermediate (Hepadnaviruses, e.g., Hepatitis B).

One of the most defining characteristics of viral genomes, particularly those of RNA viruses, is their high mutation rate. Unlike cellular life, many viral polymerases lack proofreading mechanisms, leading to the rapid accumulation of genetic changes. This process drives the formation of quasispecies—a dynamic cloud of related variants that is central to their adaptability and ability to escape host immune responses or antiviral treatments [Friedman, 2022]. RNA viruses typically exhibit mutation rates on the order of 10^-4 to 10^-6 substitutions per nucleotide per cell infection, which is several orders of magnitude higher than that of their eukaryotic hosts.

To study these elusive entities, virologists have developed foundational biotechnologies that allow for the stable manipulation of viral genetic material. A primary advancement was the construction of cDNA libraries. A cDNA library is a collection of complementary DNA (cDNA) fragments synthesized from messenger RNA (mRNA) using the enzyme reverse transcriptase [CD Genomics]. This transformation is critical for studying RNA viruses, whose unstable genomes cannot be directly cloned. By converting mRNA into stable, double-stranded DNA, researchers can clone, sequence, and engineer viral genes using robust DNA-based techniques [Thermo Fisher Scientific].

The construction of a cDNA library involves several key steps:
1. mRNA Isolation: Purifying mRNA from cellular RNA, often using oligo(dT) beads to target the poly-A tail.
2. First-Strand Synthesis: Reverse transcriptase synthesizes a single strand of cDNA using mRNA as a template.
3. Second-Strand Synthesis: DNA polymerase replaces the mRNA strand with a second DNA strand, creating double-stranded cDNA (ds-cDNA).
4. Cloning: The ds-cDNA is ligated into a vector (such as a plasmid) and introduced into a host cell for amplification.

Complementing cDNA libraries is plasmid technology. Plasmids are small, circular, extrachromosomal DNA molecules that replicate independently within a host cell, typically bacteria. They serve as the fundamental enabling platform for controlled genetic exchange in the laboratory. A typical engineered plasmid contains an origin of replication (ori), an antibiotic-resistance gene for selection, and a multiple cloning site (MCS) for inserting foreign DNA [Addgene]. Plasmids allow scientists to precisely combine disparate genetic elements—such as a viral gene, a specific promoter, and a resistance marker—into a single functional unit that can be easily manipulated and amplified.

In modern research, these foundational tools have been augmented by high-throughput techniques like Deep Mutational Scanning (DMS). DMS systematically maps how thousands of different mutations affect a viral protein's function. The process involves generating a library of mutants, subjecting them to a functional challenge (e.g., viral replication or antibody binding), and using next-generation sequencing to count the frequency of each mutant before and after selection. This produces a detailed "fitness map" of the protein, identifying essential regions and potential escape routes before they emerge in nature [Bloom and Neher, 2023].

To illustrate basic genomic analysis using Python, consider the following script for calculating the GC content of a viral sequence. GC content—the proportion of nucleotides that are either Guanine (G) or Cytosine (C)—is a fundamental genomic metric that varies significantly among viral taxa and can influence factors like codon usage, structural stability, and the ability to adapt to a host's intracellular environment.

Python Example: Basic Sequence Analysis

from Bio.Seq import Seq
from Bio.SeqUtils import gc_fraction

def analyze_viral_sequence(sequence_string):
    """Calculates GC content and length of a given sequence string."""
    viral_seq = Seq(sequence_string)
    length = len(viral_seq)
    gc_cont = gc_fraction(viral_seq) * 100

    print("Sequence Length: " + str(length) + " bp")
    print("GC Content: " + str(round(gc_cont, 2)) + "%")

# Sample SARS-CoV-2 Spike partial sequence
sample_seq = "ATGTTTGTTTTTCTTGTTTTATTGCCACTAGTCTCTAGTCAGTGTGTTAATCTTACAACCAGA"
analyze_viral_sequence(sample_seq)

This simple calculation is the starting point for more complex bioinformatic tasks. By examining the nucleotide composition and applying bioinformatic tools, we can begin to decode the underlying constraints and evolutionary history encoded in the viral genome.

As we move forward, we must remain aware that our technical capabilities, while vast, are always limited by the sampling of available data and the stochastic nature of viral replication. The formation of scientific knowledge about viral origins depends on the rigorous application of these tools and the subsequent interpretation of the results through the lens of evolutionary theory.

Synthetic biology has further expanded the horizon of viral genomics. As achieved by Eckard Wimmer's team in 2002, the synthesis of the poliovirus genome "de novo" from its publicly available sequence demonstrated that a replicating "organism" could be resurrected from pure genomic information [Wimmer, 2002]. This breakthrough provided the ultimate proof that the poliovirus sequence was correct and fundamentally altered the scientific paradigm, shifting the perspective of viruses from purely biological entities to "chemicals with a life cycle" [Wimmer, 2002]. However, this capability also raised significant biosecurity concerns, highlighting the dual-use nature of advanced biotechnology—the ability to resurrect extinct pathogens or engineer new ones necessitates responsible governance and international cooperation.

In addition to these foundational tools, researchers use experimental evolution (EE) to propagate microbial populations, like viruses, in controlled lab environments for many generations. This allows scientists to observe evolution in real-time, providing an empirical link between genetic changes and observable phenotypes [ASM Journals]. By freezing ancestral populations and later reviving them for direct comparison against their evolved descendants, researchers can quantify the fitness effects of mutations under specific selective pressures, such as antiviral drugs or new hosts. EE moves beyond inferring historical events from static sequence data (phylogenetics) to actively demonstrating the dynamics and fitness consequences of genetic exchange and mutation.

The convergence of these biotechnologies—cDNA libraries, plasmid technology, synthetic biology, and experimental evolution—provides a robust platform for modern virology research. In the following chapters, we will explore how these empirical foundations are used to develop quantitative metrics for natural selection and to build probabilistic models of viral evolutionary history.

Through the integration of these technical capabilities with bioinformatic and computational frameworks, we can begin to reconstruct the complex pathways of viral evolution and gain insight into the emergence of novel variants.


CHAPTER 2: QUANTITATIVE SELECTION METRICS: DN/DS AND PNC/PNR

Natural selection leaves a distinct signature on the genetic material of viral populations. By comparing the rates of different types of substitutions, we can infer the evolutionary pressures acting on a gene or specific genomic regions. The two most prominent metrics used for this purpose are dN/dS and pNC/pNR.

The dN/dS Method (Nei & Gojobori, 1986)

The dN/dS ratio, often denoted as ω (omega), is the classic measure for detecting selection in coding sequences. This method estimates the rates of synonymous substitutions (dS)—nucleotide changes that do not alter the encoded amino acid—and nonsynonymous substitutions (dN)—changes that result in an amino acid replacement [Nei and Gojobori, 1986].

The algorithm proposed by Nei and Gojobori (1986) involves a systematic 3-step process for calculating these rates:
1. Counting Synonymous and Nonsynonymous Sites: For every codon in the sequences, the method calculates the number of synonymous (S) and nonsynonymous (N) sites. A synonymous site is one where a mutation is expected to be synonymous, while a nonsynonymous site is one where it is expected to change the amino acid. For example, a four-fold degenerate site counts as 1.0 synonymous site.
2. Counting Substitutions: The number of synonymous (Sd) and nonsynonymous (Nd) differences between the sequences is counted. If two codons differ by more than one nucleotide, all possible evolutionary pathways between them are considered and averaged.
3. Applying Corrections: To account for multiple substitutions at the same site over time ("multiple hits"), a correction model is applied, typically the Jukes-Cantor (1969) formula. The final rates are calculated as dS = Sd / S and dN = Nd / N, after the correction is applied to both the numerator and denominator.

The ratio of these two rates provides insight into the type of selection acting on the protein:
1. Purifying (Negative) Selection (dN/dS < 1): This suggests that amino acid changes are deleterious and are being removed by selection to preserve the protein's function. This is the most common state for functional proteins, reflecting the evolutionary constraints imposed by structural and functional requirements.
2. Neutral Evolution (dN/dS ≈ 1): This suggests that amino acid changes have no significant effect on fitness, and mutations accumulate primarily through genetic drift.
3. Positive (Darwinian) Selection (dN/dS > 1): This suggests that amino acid changes are being promoted by selection, often indicating adaptation to a new environment or host, or diversification to evade immune recognition.

While powerful, the dN/dS method has limitations. It assumes that synonymous mutations are strictly neutral, ignoring potential selective pressures on codon usage bias or mRNA secondary structure. Furthermore, it can mask positive selection acting on a few specific sites if the ratio is averaged over an entire gene. To address this, site-specific models have been developed, such as those in the PAML (Phylogenetic Analysis by Maximum Likelihood) package, which use a likelihood framework to identify individual residues under selection [Yang, 2007].

The pNC/pNR Method (Hughes, Ota, and Nei, 1990)

The pNC/pNR method provides a more nuanced approach by categorizing nonsynonymous substitutions based on the chemical properties of amino acids. Developed by Austin Hughes and his colleagues, this method divides nonsynonymous changes into conservative substitutions (pNC), which involve amino acids with similar properties, and radical substitutions (pNR), which involve amino acids with different properties, such as a change in charge or polarity [Hughes et al., 1990].

The classification of amino acids as "conservative" or "radical" depends on the chosen biochemical property. A common classification scheme, such as that by Taylor (1986), groups amino acids based on their size, hydrophobicity, and charge. For instance, a change from Lysine (K) to Arginine (R) might be considered conservative with respect to charge (both are positive), while a change from Lysine to Glutamic Acid (E) would be considered radical as it involves a reversal of charge.

This method is particularly useful for identifying selection that promotes diversity in specific functional properties. For example, Hughes and his colleagues (1990) used this approach to demonstrate that in the antigen recognition site of MHC molecules, radical substitutions involving charge changes occurred significantly more frequently than expected by chance (pNR > pNC). This finding provided evidence that selection acts to diversify the "charge profile" of the binding cleft to accommodate a wider variety of foreign peptides. It moves beyond the binary dN/dS view to reveal the specific biochemical nature of the selective pressure.

To illustrate a basic selection metric calculation, consider a toy Python example that computes the simple proportion of differences (p-distance) between two viral sequences. This is a foundational step before more complex corrections, such as the Jukes-Cantor model, are applied to estimate dN/dS.

Python Example: Calculating Genetic p-Distance

def calculate_p_distance(seq1, seq2):
    """Calculates the proportion of nucleotide differences between two sequences."""
    if len(seq1) != len(seq2):
        raise ValueError("Sequences must be of equal length for p-distance calculation.")

    differences = 0
    total_sites = len(seq1)

    for char1, char2 in zip(seq1, seq2):
        if char1 != char2:
            differences += 1

    p_dist = differences / total_sites
    return round(p_dist, 4)

# Sample codon sequences
codon_seq1 = "ATGGTTTTA"
codon_seq2 = "ATGGTTTTT" # Synonymous change at the last position

print("Calculated p-Distance: " + str(calculate_p_distance(codon_seq1, codon_seq2)))

By extending this logic to count synonymous and nonsynonymous sites, as performed in our standalone scripts such as `dsdn_dist.py`, we can calculate the ω ratio for any pair of aligned viral sequences.

The application of these metrics requires high-quality, codon-aware alignments. Any gaps in the sequences must be handled carefully, as they can disrupt the codon structure. Our tools, such as `pal2nal_enforce.py`, ensure that nucleotide alignments are correctly aligned based on their corresponding protein sequences, providing a robust foundation for selection analysis.


CHAPTER 3: THE ARCHITECTURE OF VIRAL PHYLOGENETICS: TREES AND ANCESTRAL STATES

Phylogenetic analysis is the prevailing method for the study of virus evolution and their populations. This methodology is inherently probabilistic and ideally based on genetic data. An alternative approach is to analyze morphological traits, but this is hampered by limited data samples and lesser reliability as a classifier with taxonomic insight, such as caused by the confounding factors of convergence of traits over time among unrelated populations [Friedman, 2026].

A phylogenetic tree is a graphical representation of the evolutionary relationships among a set of taxa. The branching pattern reflects how lineages have diverged from common ancestors over time. In virology, these trees are used for tracking outbreak origins (phylodynamics), identifying transmission chains, and studying the evolution of virulence or drug resistance [Friedman, 2025].

The construction of a phylogenetic tree involves a rigorous computational pipeline:
1. Data Preparation: Gathering high-quality sequences and accurate metadata, often from repositories like NCBI GenBank or GISAID.
2. Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA): Homologous residues are aligned using tools like MAFFT. For large viral datasets, the FFT-NS-i algorithm is frequently employed for its efficiency.
3. Tree Inference: Building the tree using statistical frameworks. Maximum Likelihood (ML) is a prevailing method, implemented in tools like IQ-TREE. A critical step in ML inference is model selection. IQ-TREE’s ModelFinder (MFP) tests a wide array of protein substitution models (e.g., JTT, WAG, LG, HIVw) and uses the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) to select the model that best explains the data. For rapidly evolving viruses, substitution matrices like HIVw—derived specifically from viral data—often provide the best fit.

A critical component of our workflow is Ancestral State Reconstruction (ASR). ASR is a technique used to infer the genetic sequences of ancestral organisms, providing insights into viral evolution, adaptation, and the emergence of new traits. By analyzing a phylogenetic tree and its corresponding sequence alignment, we can infer the most probable states for each character at each internal (ancestral) node.

Computational tools like TreeTime or the ASR module in IQ-TREE use probabilistic models to reconstruct these ancestral states. In a Maximum Likelihood framework, the reconstructed state at a node is the one that maximizes the probability of the observed tip sequences given the tree topology and substitution model. However, it is a key principle that the deeper a node is in a tree, the more uncertain its reconstructed state will be. This uncertainty arises from several factors:
1. Signal Erosion (Mutational Saturation): Over long evolutionary periods, a single site can mutate multiple times (e.g., A→G→C→T). We only observe the final state, losing the intermediate history and making reconstruction statistically difficult.
2. Propagated Error: ASR is dependent on the accuracy of the input tree. If deep branches are poorly resolved, the reconstructed ancestors will be based on a flawed foundation.
3. Compounding Errors: The greater the divergence, the higher the rate of error in estimating past states. This compounding effect leads to low reliability for ancestral character construction in deep lineages [Friedman, 2026].

One specialized tool for handling massive phylogenies is UShER (Ultrafast Sample placement on Existing tRee). UShER excels at placing new pathogen sequences onto existing phylogenetic trees, making it invaluable for tracking viral evolution during large outbreaks [Turakhia et al., 2021]. UShER stores these trees in a compact Mutation-Annotated Tree (MAT) format using Protocol Buffers (.pb). In a MAT, every internal node and tip is represented, and branches are explicitly annotated with the nucleotide mutations that distinguish a descendant from its parent. This discrete representation allows for extremely rapid placement of new samples without recalculating the entire tree.

The following toy Python script illustrates how to parse a simple ancestor-descendant pair derived from ASR analysis. This logic is a foundational part of our data bridge between phylogenetic output and downstream machine learning tasks.

Python Example: Parsing Ancestral States

import pandas as pd

def parse_asr_pairs(state_file_data):
    """
    Parses a simplified version of IQ-TREE ASR output into a sequence.
    The real state file is a large table where each row is a site.
    """
    # Simulate a small portion of a .state file table
    data = {
        'Node': ['Node1', 'Node1', 'Node1', 'Node2', 'Node2', 'Node2'],
        'Site': [1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3],
        'State': ['A', 'T', 'G', 'A', 'T', 'C']
    }
    df = pd.DataFrame(data)

    # Reconstruct sequences by grouping by Node
    sequences = df.groupby('Node')['State'].apply(''.join).to_dict()

    for node, seq in sequences.items():
        print("Reconstructed Sequence for " + node + ": " + seq)

    return sequences

# Demonstrate ASR parsing
parse_asr_pairs(None)

This basic approach is expanded in our `parsimony_reconstruction.py` script, which implements Fitch parsimony for branch-annotated Newick trees produced by tools like UShER. These parsimony methods provide a dependency-free way to reconstruct ancestral sequences and generate pairs for our evolutionary models.

Robust empirical analysis of virus populations relies on robust molecular data sampling, stochastic modeling, and reliability in the methods of phylogenetic reconstruction. Despite the precision of modern models, we must remain aware of the limitations in acquiring knowledge of past histories and the inherent uncertainties in any historical reconstruction [Friedman, 2026].

In past studies of biological populations, it has been shown that the origin of new lineages is generally not an outcome of a simple and distinct population process, but instead that there are multiple factors that are influential. An example is in the HIV-1 viral type (human), which is classified into subtypes, yet their molecular evolution shows several events where a subtype is more closely related to simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV; non-human primate) than to other HIV-1 subtypes [Sharp and Hahn, 2011]. This reveals a conflict between traditional typologies—such as host preference—and modern systematic taxonomy based on evolutionary relatedness [Hennig, 1950].

Another case study of viral evolution is in influenza A, with a genome of several genetic segments encapsulated by a protein shell. These segments may exchange segments by recombination among viral lineages (reassortment), so in these cases, the H and N segments are expected to reflect a mixed ancestry and show nonconcordant phylogenetic trees [Webster et al., 1992]. This mechanism was a primary driver in the 2009 H1N1 pandemic and continues to shape the global panzootic of H5N1 influenza in mammals [Peacock et al., 2025].

Furthermore, recombination has been inferred to have produced the XBB subtype of SARS-CoV-2 through genetic exchange between two Omicron BA.2 sublineages [Uriu et al., 2023]. This process occurred alongside strong purifying selection, as the virus adapted to a landscape of increasing host immunity [Li et al., 2020].

In the next chapter, we will explore how these ancestor-descendant pairs can be used as training data for deep learning models to predict future evolutionary trajectories.


CHAPTER 4: DEEP LEARNING AND SEQUENCE-TO-SEQUENCE MODELING IN EVOLUTION

The application of deep learning models to biological sequence analysis has revolutionized our ability to predict evolutionary changes. Among these models, the Transformer architecture—the foundation of modern large language models—has proven remarkably effective in identifying patterns within protein and nucleotide sequences.

The core of this mechanism is the Scaled Dot-Product Attention. For every token in the sequence, the model computes three distinct vectors: a Query (Q), a Key (K), and a Value (V). These vectors are produced by multiplying the token's embedding by three learned weight matrices (WQ, WK, WV). The attention mechanism then computes a weighted sum of the Values, where the weight assigned to each Value is determined by the compatibility of the Query with its corresponding Key.

Mathematically, the attention score between two tokens is calculated as the dot product of the Query of one and the Key of the other, scaled by the square root of the dimension (dk) to prevent gradients from becoming too small, and passed through a softmax function to ensure the weights sum to 1. This allows the model to capture long-range dependencies, such as the relationship between distant amino acids that are close in a protein's 3D structure, effectively learning a proxy for tertiary structure from primary sequence data.

Multi-Head Attention (MHA) further enhances this by performing the attention calculation multiple times in parallel with different weight matrices. Each "head" can potentially focus on a different type of relationship—for example, one head might track local structural motifs, while another focuses on long-range electrostatic interactions.

Our workflow uses a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) Transformer to predict a descendant viral sequence from its immediate ancestor. This architecture consists of two main components:
1. The Encoder: Processes the full ancestor sequence to create a high-dimensional representation (hidden states) for every token.
2. The Decoder: Generates the predicted descendant sequence one token at a time. It uses Masked Self-Attention to ensure it only "sees" tokens it has already generated, and Cross-Attention to incorporate information from the Encoder's hidden states.

The training data for this model is generated through Ancestral State Reconstruction (ASR), which produces pairs of (ancestor, descendant) sequences. By training on these pairs, the model learns the underlying mutational patterns and constraints that define viral diversification.

A critical part of preparing biological sequences for a Transformer is tokenization and padding. Each amino acid is mapped to a unique integer ID, and sequences are padded to a fixed maximum length so they can be processed in batches by the GPU. Positional Encoding is also added to the input embeddings to provide the model with information about the relative order of the tokens, as the attention mechanism itself is permutation-invariant.

Python Example: Sequence Tokenization and Padding

import numpy as np

def tokenize_sequence(seq, vocab_map, maxlen):
    """
    Simulates tokenizing a sequence and padding it to a fixed length.
    Standard tokens: [PAD]=0, [START]=1, [END]=2.
    """
    # Start and End tokens are often used in seq2seq models
    tokens = [vocab_map["[START]"]]
    tokens.extend([vocab_map.get(char, 0) for char in seq])
    tokens.append(vocab_map["[END]"])

    # Pad the sequence with 0s if it's shorter than maxlen
    if len(tokens) < maxlen:
        tokens.extend([vocab_map["[PAD]"]] * (maxlen - len(tokens)))
    else:
        tokens = tokens[:maxlen] # Truncate if longer

    return tokens

# Define a simple vocabulary map
vocab = {"[PAD]": 0, "[START]": 1, "[END]": 2, "A": 3, "T": 4, "G": 5, "C": 6}
sample_seq = "ATG"
tokenized = tokenize_sequence(sample_seq, vocab, 10)

print("Sequence: " + sample_seq)
print("Tokenized and Padded: " + str(tokenized))

One of the most powerful features of the Transformer is its interpretability through attention mapping. By visualizing the attention scores—the weights the model assigns to different parts of the sequence—we can see which residues the model has "learned" are most important for predicting evolution.

For example, in our study of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein, we found that the model autonomously identified the Receptor-Binding Domain (RBD) and N-Terminal Domain (NTD) as attention hotspots (Figure 2). These regions are the most exposed parts of the protein and the primary targets of the host immune system, making them the areas under the strongest selective pressure to mutate. Despite being only trained on 1D sequences, the model's attention effectively re-discovered these critical domains of the protein's 3D structure [Friedman, 2025].

The technical challenges of this approach include memory scaling constraints, as the Transformer's self-attention mechanism has a complexity of O(N²), where N is the sequence length. Processing full viral genomes or large proteins like the Spike protein (3,837-token nucleotide sequence) requires significant VRAM beyond standard hardware. This necessitates the use of more memory-efficient architectures or the truncation of sequences to manageable lengths [Friedman, 2025].

Through the integration of phylogenetically-derived training data and interpretable deep learning architectures, we can build models that not only predict evolutionary trajectories but also provide scientific insight into the biophysical rules governing viral diversification.


CHAPTER 5: ECOLOGICAL AND SPATIO-TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF VIRAL POPULATIONS

The evolutionary trajectory of a virus is shaped by complex population-genetic forces, including positive selection, purifying selection, genetic drift, and recombination. These forces can be quantitatively captured by a single fundamental metric: nucleotide diversity (π).

Nucleotide diversity is defined as the average number of nucleotide differences per site between any two sequences randomly sampled from a population [Nei and Li, 1979]. By systematically measuring π across time and space, we can quantify the imprint of major evolutionary events on a viral population's genetic variation.

Selective Sweeps and Diversity Collapse

A selective sweep occurs when a highly-fit variant rapidly dominates a population worldwide. A sweep on a largely non-recombining genome—as is the case for most of the SARS-CoV-2 genome between recombination events—drags along linked sites through "genetic hitchhiking." This process purges nearly all pre-existing variation, causing a population-wide collapse in genetic diversity.

The history of the COVID-19 pandemic is a series of such sweeps:
1. The rise of the D614G mutation early in 2020.
2. The emergence and global dominance of the Alpha (B.1.1.7) variant.
3. The replacement of Alpha by the more transmissible Delta (B.1.617.2) variant.
4. The rapid replacement of Delta by the Omicron (B.1.1.529) lineage.

Under the Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution (Kimura, 1983), π reaches an equilibrium value determined by the product of the effective population size (Ne) and the per-site mutation rate (μ). For a haploid virus, the classical formula is π = 2 * Ne * μ. Significant departures from this stability—such as the sharp drops in π observed at the onset of each variant sweep—signal non-neutral processes. Tajima’s D is another metric used to detect these departures; a negative Tajima’s D value indicates an excess of rare alleles, a signature of a recent population expansion following a selective sweep or bottleneck.

Founder Effects and Geographic Spread

A global selective sweep is the culmination of a local sweep followed by worldwide spread. As a virus seeds a new region, only a subset of lineages founders the new outbreak—a classical founder effect. Each transmission bottleneck amplifies genetic drift and reduces local diversity. This creates geographic "diversity gradients," where π tends to be highest in a variant’s region of origin (where multiple lineages have had time to accumulate) and lower in downstream "sink" locations. Comparative studies have shown that as variants like Delta spread, viral populations in distant regions converged to near-uniform sequence spectra, reflecting successive spatial founder events [Friedman, 2025].

Recombination and Mosaic Diversity

In contrast to sweep-dominated regimes are "mosaic" regimes, where multiple lineages co-circulate for extended periods. In mid-2022, several Omicron sublineages (BA.5, BQ.1, XBB) co-existed, maintaining a high global π. This high diversity provides the opportunity for genetic exchange via recombination when a single host is co-infected with two different lineages.

A notable example is the emergence of the XBB recombinant from two BA.2 sublineages. Recombination can create abrupt evolutionary shifts, combining advantageous mutations from different backgrounds. Interestingly, the emergence of a recombinant does not always cause an immediate sweep; XBB initially contributed to the mosaic diversity before one of its descendants, XBB.1.5, acquired additional adaptive mutations and triggered a new sweep. This reveals that viral evolution alternates between regimes of high mosaic diversity and rapid diversity-purging sweeps.

To illustrate a basic population-genetic calculation, consider this toy Python script for calculating nucleotide diversity (π) from a small alignment. This logic is used in our `calculate_nucleotide_diversity.py` tool to quantify diversity from large FASTA alignments.

Python Example: Calculating Nucleotide Diversity (π)

def calculate_pi(sequences):
    """Calculates nucleotide diversity (pi) for a set of aligned sequences."""
    num_seqs = len(sequences)
    if num_seqs < 2:
        return 0.0

    total_diffs = 0
    num_pairs = 0
    seq_len = len(sequences[0])

    # Calculate all pairwise differences
    for i in range(num_seqs):
        for j in range(i + 1, num_seqs):
            diffs = sum(1 for c1, c2 in zip(sequences[i], sequences[j]) if c1 != c2)
            total_diffs += diffs
            num_pairs += 1

    # Calculate average differences per site
    avg_diffs = total_diffs / num_pairs
    pi = avg_diffs / seq_len
    return round(pi, 6)

# Sample aligned viral sequences
aligned_samples = [
    "ATGCGT",
    "ATGCGT",
    "ATGCGA",
    "ATGCGT"
]

print("Nucleotide Diversity (pi): " + str(calculate_pi(aligned_samples)))

By integrating temporal and spatial diversity patterns, we can develop a more comprehensive view of viral dynamics. A global sweep is not an instantaneous event but the culmination of a local sweep followed by worldwide spread via successive founder effects. Confirming these patterns in genomic data validates that recurring sweeps and founder events jointly govern viral evolution [Friedman, 2025].

Through these quantitative approaches, we can move beyond describing viral events to testing whether observed diversity patterns deviate from a neutral expectation, providing a more robust foundation for forming beliefs about viral origins and their subsequent dynamics.


CONCLUSION: EPISTEMOLOGY AND THE FUTURE OF VIRAL SURVEILLANCE

The study of viral genomics is a testament to the power and limitations of the scientific method. As we have explored throughout this volume, the formation of a robust scientific belief about the origins and evolution of viruses depends on a careful integration of empirical data, stochastic modeling, and probabilistic inference.

The methodologies we have discussed—from the molecular foundations of cDNA libraries to the advanced architecture of Transformer models—provide a framework for navigating the "cloud of unknowing" that surrounds the deeper lineages of viral populations. By applying quantitative metrics of selection and reconstructing ancestral character states, we can move beyond mere observation and toward a more definitive, data-driven understanding of the evolutionary forces that shape our world.

As scientific methodology emerged as a formalized system for acquiring knowledge based on empirical inquiry, it also provided a means for identifying and rejecting sophistries—the statements of mere opinion that lack material evidence. In the biological sciences, where historical reconstruction is inherently uncertain, we must maintain a reasonable level of skepticism toward novel conclusions and ground our communications in the tenets of empiricism. This is an eternal problem of philosophy and a reminder on the rejection of false ideas and ideals, otherwise expressed in the ancient world as a worship of idols (personifications of abstract thoughts), and reveals a source of a limit in our capacity to acquire knowledge [Friedman, 2026].

In society, there is not a widespread education on the stochastic processes of the natural world, nor is there an opportunity for practical experience in an empirical science, so this leads to a common-sense reliance on the speech of experts as measured by their status and class in a society. The problem is this is as likely to form the mere images of reality and to substitute the modern rigors for acquiring knowledge with that of sophistry and mere rhetoric. As cautioned by Protagoras, "Man is the measure of all things," yet nature is nearly unique in that it is not mere reflections and interpretations of our mind, but instead that which emerges from the processes of nature [Friedman, 2026].

The future of viral surveillance lies in the convergence of these interdisciplinary approaches. By integrating global phylogenetic structures, quantitative diversity metrics, and the predictive power of deep learning, we can enhance our capacity to track the emergence of novel variants and inform public health responses. This forward-looking perspective, rooted in the philosophical foundations of science, provides a robust platform for future research and innovation in virology.

As we conclude, we must remember that nature is not merely a set of reflections of our own mind, but an independent set of processes. The scientific method serves as a candle in the dark, illuminating the hidden architecture of viral evolution and providing a foundation for forming beliefs that are both confident and robust [Friedman, 2026].


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Addgene. Molecular Biology Reference. https://www.addgene.org/mol-bio-reference/

Aiewsakun, P., & Katzourakis, A. (2016). Time-dependent rate phenomenon in viruses. Journal of Virology, 90, 7184-7195. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00593-16

Andersen, K. G., Rambaut, A., Lipkin, W. I., Holmes, E. C., & Garry, R. F. (2020). The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2. Nature Medicine, 26, 450-452.

Bloom, J. D., & Neher, R. A. (2023). Fitness effects of mutations to SARS-CoV-2 proteins. Virus Evolution, 9(2), vead055. https://doi.org/10.1093/ve/vead055

Carrasco-Hernandez, R., Jácome, R., López Vidal, Y., & Ponce De León, S. (2017). Are RNA viruses candidate agents for the next global pandemic? A review. ILAR Journal, 58(3), 343-358. doi: 10.1093/ilar/ilx026

CD Genomics. cDNA: Current Applications and Future Horizons. https://www.cd-genomics.com/blog/cdna-application-gene-cloning-pcr-drug-development/

Fisher, R. (1930). The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press. doi: 10.5962/bhl.title.27468

Friedman, R. (2022). A Hierarchy of Interactions between Pathogenic Virus and Vertebrate Host. Symmetry, 14(11), 2274. https://doi.org/10.3390/sym14112274

Friedman, R. (2024). Techniques for Theoretical Prediction of Immunogenic Peptides. Encyclopedia, 4(1), 600-621. https://doi.org/10.3390/encyclopedia4010038

Friedman, R. (2025). The Elusive Genesis: Stochasticity and the Challenge of Reconstructing Viral Origins. Preprints. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202505.2277.v2

Friedman, R. (2025). The Viral Chase: Outsmarting Evolution with Data Trees and AI Predictions. Preprints. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202506.0456.v1

Friedman, R. (2025). Anatomy of a Transformer: An Essay on the Code and Concepts for Biological Sequence Analysis. Preprints. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202506.0623.v1

Friedman, R. (2026). Scientific belief in determining the origins of viruses. Microbes & Immunity. doi: 10.36922/MI025500130. https://doi.org/10.36922/MI025500130

Hamelin, D.J., Scicluna, M., Saadie, I., Mostefai, F., Grenier, J.C., Baron, C., ... & Hussin, J.G. (2024). Predicting pathogen evolution and immune evasion in the age of artificial intelligence. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, 23, 1370-1382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2024.03.044

Hennig, W. (1950). Grundzüge Einer Theorie Der Phylogenetischen Systematik. Berlin, Germany: Deutscher Zentralverlag.

Hennig, W. (1999). In: Davis, D. D., & Zangerl, R., editors. Phylogenetic Systematics. Urbana, IL, USA: University of Illinois Press.

Hughes, A. L., & Nei, M. (1988). Pattern of nucleotide substitution at major histocompatibility complex loci reveals overdominant selection. Nature, 335(6186), 167-170.

Hughes, A. L., Ota, T., & Nei, M. (1990). Positive Darwinian selection promotes charge profile diversity in the antigen-binding cleft of class I major-histocompatibility-complex molecules. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 7(6), 515-524.

Jukes, T. H., & Cantor, C. R. (1969). Evolution of protein molecules. In Mammalian Protein Metabolism (pp. 21-132). New York, NY, USA: Academic Press.

Kant, I. (1998). In: Paul, G., & Wood, A. W., editors. Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Kimura, M. (1983). The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Li, X., Giorgi, E. E., Marichannegowda, M. H., et al. (2020). Emergence of SARS-CoV-2 through recombination and strong purifying selection. Science Advances, 6, eabb9153. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abb9153

McBroome, J., et al. (2021). A daily-updated database and tools for comprehensive SARS-CoV-2 mutation-annotated trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 38(12), 5819–5824. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab264

Nei, M., & Li, W. H. (1979). Mathematical model for studying genetic variation in terms of restriction endonucleases. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 76(10), 5269-5273.

Nei, M., & Gojobori, T. (1986). Simple methods for estimating the numbers of synonymous and nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 3(4), 418-426.

Peacock, T. P., Moncla, L., Dudas, G., et al. (2025). The global H5N1 influenza panzootic in mammals. Nature, 637(8045), 304-313. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08054-z

Planas, D., et al. (2024). SARS-CoV-2 XBB.1.5 neutralization by vaccine and therapeutic antibodies. Nature Communications, 15, 1234.

Rambaut, A., et al. (2021). A dynamic nomenclature proposal for SARS-CoV-2 lineages to assist genomic epidemiology. Nature Microbiology, 5, 1403-1407.

Sagan, C. (1996). The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark. New York, NY, USA: Random House.

Sharp, P. M., & Hahn, B. H. (2011). Origins of HIV and the AIDS pandemic. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 1, a006841. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a006841

Shu, Y., & McCauley, J. (2017). GISAID: Global initiative on sharing all influenza data - from vision to reality. Eurosurveillance, 22, 30494.

Suchard, M. A., et al. (2018). Bayesian phylogenetic and phylodynamic data integration using BEAST 1.10. Virus Evolution, 4(1), vey016. doi: 10.1093/ve/vey016

Taylor, W. R. (1986). The classification of amino acid conservation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 119(2), 205-218.

Thermo Fisher Scientific. Five Steps to Optimal cDNA Synthesis. https://www.thermofisher.com/us/en/home/life-science/pcr/reverse-transcription/5steps-cDNA.html

Turakhia, Y., et al. (2021). Ultrafast Sample placement on Existing tRees (UShER) enables real-time phylogenetics... Nature Genetics, 53, 935-940. doi: 10.1038/s41588-021-00862-7

Uriu, K., Ito, J., Zahradnik, J., et al. (2023). Enhanced transmissibility, infectivity, and immune resistance of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron XBB.1.5 variant. Lancet Infectious Diseases, 23, 280-281. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(23)00051-8

Vaswani, A., et al. (2017). Attention Is All You Need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30.

Vlastos, G. (1946). Parmenides Theory of Knowledge. Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association, 77, 66-77.

Webster, R. G., Bean, W. J., Gorman, O. T., Chambers, T. M., & Kawaoka, Y. (1992). Evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiological Reviews, 56, 152-179. doi: 10.1128/mr.56.1.152-179.1992

Wimmer, E. (2002). The test-tube synthesis of poliovirus. EMBO Press. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400728

Yang, Z. (2007). PAML 4: Phylogenetic Analysis by Maximum Likelihood. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 24(8), 1586-1591. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msm088
